As of Spring 5, the default password encoder is the DelegatingPasswordEncoder.
As the name suggests,
it delegates the encoding and password matching to an appropriate encoder.
It implements the PasswordEncoder interface,
which requires two methods to be implemented,
the encode method, which encodes a plain text password into a hash,
and the matches method,
which checks if a plain text password matches the
encoded password used for authentication.
Now this will all make more sense once we look at the
PasswordEncodersFactories class.
This is the factory that configures the default DelegatingPasswordEncoder.
You can see,
it configures a map of many encoders from MD5 to bcrypt and creates an
instance of the DelegatingPasswordEncoder with the encoders map,
as well as an encodingId.
Now the encodingId configures the default encoder to be
used when the encode method is called.
Now how the delegating encoder works is that it expects the
password retrieved from your identity store,
i.e.
the hashed raw password, to be prefixed with an encoded prefix ID.
It will then use the encoder map to determine which one of them
matches the ID and use that for authentication.
Now in this case, the passwords are prefixed with noop.
Hence, it will strip this prefix and use the noop password encoder.
Now this gives you the flexibility to use different types of
encoders for passwords in your identity store,
which makes migrating to bcrypt or other encoders a lot more simpler
as user accounts with credentials encoded with,
say,
a legacy MD5 can still log in and be gradually migrated
to the different encoder over time, perhaps when their password resets.
Now by default, the encoder ID is set to bcrypt,
which means passwords, by default, will be encoded by bcrypt.
Currently in MongoDB,
I have configured three users and used the noop password prefix.
Hence, when the user logs into the application,
the delegating password encoder will use the noop password
encoder to see if the password matches.
Now this is not secure as the noop password encoder
effectively is a plain text password matcher,
and we want to hash our password using bcrypt.
Now to do this,
we need to autowire the delegating PasswordEncoder into the
RegistrationServices class and then encode the password.
Now before we can do that,
you will also need to expose the encoder as a bean so that we can
autowire it in to the RegistrationService class.
Now you can do this in your configuration class,
which extends the WebSecurityConfigurerAdapter.
Create a method that returns a PasswordEncoder and
annotate it with the Bean annotation.
Now you can then use the PasswordEncoderFactories class to
return the password encoder returned by the
createDelegatingPasswordEncoder method.
Now if we restart our application and register as a new user,
you can see that the password is now hashed,
and the prefix is bcrypt.
We can now log in as a new user,
and the delegating encoder will use the prefix to determine that it should
the bcrypt encoder to perform the password matching.
You can still log in with the other user accounts
that have the noop password prefix.
Now you can also set a default password encoder for matching.
In this way, if the prefix ID is missing,
it will not throw an exception, but use the encoder you specified,
in this case, perhaps the bcrypt encoder or any other one you want to use.
Now if you want to encode your password for registration with
a different algorithm other than bcrypt,
you can simply create your own instance of the DelegatingPasswordEncoder.
You can also add your own map of encoders you want to support,
as well as change the encoder type to something,
say, like scrypt.
Now the password encoders with a line through them have now been deprecated,
which means they are no longer secure, things like MD5,
etc.
So it's not recommended you use any of these.
Now if you only want to use bcrypt in your application,
you can simply return the BCryptPasswordEncoder as a bean, and Spring will then use this encoder for both encoding and matching.